---
layout: post
title: Antony Anghie, Francisco de Vitoria and the Colonial Origins of International Law
author: worlding
tags: Anghie, Vitoria, international-law
eye_catch:
---
Arguement:
>while Vitoria's jurispudence relies in many respects on existing doctrines, he reconceptualizes these doctrines or else invents new ones in order to deal with the novel problem of the Indians. ... international law, such as it existed in Vitoria's time, did not _precede_ and thereby effortlessly resolve the problem of Spanish-Indian relations; rather, international law was created out fo the unique issues generated by the encounter between the Sppanish and the Indians. 322

>...Vitoria does not interpret the problem fo Spanish-Indian relations as a problem of creating order among socereign states, of deciding how the competing lcaims of the sovereign Spanish and the sovereign Indians are to be resolved. Rather, Vitoria's work addresses, a prior set of questions. Whos is sovereign? What are the powers of a sovereign? Are the Indian's sovereign? What are the rights and duties of the Indians and the Spaniards? How are the respective rights and duties of the Spanish and the Indians to be decided? 322

>The problem confonting Vitoria, then, was not the problem of order among sovereign states, but the problem of creating a system of law which could be used to account for relations between societies which he understood to belong to two very different cultural orders, each with tis own ideas of propriety and governance. Sovereignty doctrine --- ny which I broadly refer to the complex of rules deciding what entities are sovereign, and the power and limits of sovereignty --- was not already formulated and then simply applied by Vitoria to resolve the problem of creating order between different societies. Rather, __for Vitoria, sovereignty doctrine merges through his attempts to address the problem of cultural difference__. 322

1. "Vitoria repidiates traditional techniques of accounting for relations between the Spanish and the Indians." Dismissing the notion that the Pope exercised universal authority, "Vitoria clears the way for his own version of secular international law." 322
2. "... Vitoria creates a universally binding system of law by evoking a notion of natural law; this system resolves __Vitoria's problem of creating a common framework binding both Spanish and Indians alike."__
3. Rules and norms prescribed by this system, and the effect of their applicaiton on Spanish-Indian relations.
4. the question of enforcement and the sanctions applied once the norms prescribed by natural law have been violated.

## The problem of universal Law

* Conventionally decided by applying to the Indian jurisprudence developed by the Hology Roman Chursh to deal withthe Saracens.
* _Traditional framework_ based on two premises: 1) human relations were governed by devine law. 2) the Pope exercised universal jurisdiction by virtue of his divine mission to spread Christianity.
* Sovereigns, the rulers of Europe, relied on the Pope's authority to legitimize their invasions of heathen territory; making real the jurisdiction which the Pope possessed in theory.

* Based on readings of the Bible and theological authorities, Vitoria concludes that unbelievers were not deprived of their property on earth merely by virtue of their status.
* "Unbelief does not destroy either natural law or human law; but ownwership and dominion are based either on natural law or human law; therefore they are not destroyed by want of faith."
* Property and title are decided by secular systems of law. Diminishes the power of the Pope as secular system of law are administered by the sovereign.
* Goes on to deny the universal jurisdiction of the Pope. "The Pope's authority is partial, limited to the spiritual dimension of the Christian world."
* Problem: if the Pope "has no jurisdiction over the world before the law, the law could not bind someone who was not previously subject to it."
* "The Spanish and the Indians are not bound by a universal, overarching system; instead they belong to two different orders ..."
* Resolution in two parts: 1) characterisation of the Indians, 2) elaboration of a novel system of universal natural law.
* 1) Vitoria rejects the negative characterisations of the Indians, finding that they have "accordiing to their kind, the use of reason. This is clear because there is a certain method in their affairs, for they have polities which are orderly arranged and they have definite marriage and magistrates, overlords, laws, and workshops, and a system of exchange, all of which call for the use of reason; they also have a kind of religion."
* 2) Vitoria characterises the Indians as human and posessing reason. "What natural reason has established among all nations is called _jus gentium_"
* "The Pope's universal system of divine law is replaced by the universal law system of _jus gentium_ whose rules may be ascertained by the use of reason."
* The Indians are bound by _jus gentium_ because they possess reason.
* Natural law administered by sovereigns becomes the source of international law governing Spanish-Indian relations.

* The character of this law: the Spanish have a right under _jus gentium_ to travel and sojurn inthe land of the Indians. Providing they do no harm to the Indians, the Indians have no right to prevent them.
* "The natural law which solves the problem of jurisdiction is based on something akin to a secular state of nature at 'the beginning of the world'."... _jus gentium_ naturalises the legitmates a system of commerce and Spanish penetration." "the particular cultural practices of the Spanish assume the guise of universality as a result of appearing to derive from the sphere of natural law."
* "The Indians seem to participate in this system as equals." "The Indian who enters the universal realm of commerce has all the acumen and independence of market man, as opposed to the timid, ignorant childlike creatures Vitoria presents earlier"
* "While appearing to promote notions of equality and reciprocity between the Indians and the Spanish, Vitoria's scheme finally endorses and legitimatizes endless Spanish incursions into Indian society"
* Vitoria asserts that 'to keep certain people out of the city or province as being enemies, or to expel them when already there, are acts of war'. "Thus any Indian attempt to resist Spanish penetration would amount to an act of war which would justify Spanish retalialtion."
* >In establishing his system of _jus gentium_, Vitoria characterizes the Indians as having the same ontological character as the Spanish. This is a crucial prerequisite for his elaboration of a system of norms which he presents as neutraland founded upon qualities possessed by all people. 327
* "the ideal, universal Indian possesses the capacity of reason and therefore the potential to achieve perfection. This potential can only be realized, however, by the adoption or the imposition of the universally applicable practice of the Spanish."
* >The discrepancy between the ontologically 'universal' Indian and the socially, historically 'particular' Indian must be remedied by the imposition of sanctions which effect the necessary transformation. Indian will regarding the desirability of such transformation is irrelevant: the universal norms Vitoria enunciates regulate behavior not merely between the Spanish and the Indians but among the Indians themselves; thus the Spanish acquire an extraordinarily powerful right of intervention and may act on behalf of the people seen as victims of Indian rituals: 'it is immatiral that ll the Indians assent to rules and sacrifices fo this kind and do not wish the Spaniards to champion them'.
* Thus Spanish identity is projected as universal in two different but connected dimensions of Vitoria's system; __Spanish identity__ is both externalized, in that it __acts as the basis for the norms of _jus gentium___, and internalized in that it __represents the authentic identity of the Indian__.
