---
layout: post
title: Domestication
author: worlding
tags:
eye_catch:
---

In this section I move closer to home, to my home or dwelling, my locus of enunciation, the place from where I think, act, and design. In doing so my intention is not to make this an investigation of my personal self but the structures of coloniality as they operate in Australia. This distinction, which I hold to be meaningful, is nevertheless representative of a more dense and complex relation of contrary points in tension rather than a stable or comfortable dileanation. The problem is not simply that I am "in" a thing that goes by the name of the "Australian context" but, rather, that it is "in" me so to speak, as part of my being. The "Australian context" in this sense is not so much something "out there" but the very manner in which I am and how I think. Whatever distance I might hope to get on what "Australia" is or what "Australian" means there is always a residual trace of recognition and identity that forms the condition for a interpelation, the potential hail that runs ahead of and betrways any critical cognition. The effect is demonstated, for instance, in the case where I observe American political pundents or comedians marking the apparent alienness of billionare media mogul Rupurt Murdoch by labelling him as "that Australian." While I share no sympathy with Murdoch, this performance on the part of American media figures generally produces involuntary spike of annoyance and the associated thought, "Ah, no he isn't, actually. This arsehole has been an American citizen for as long as I've been alive". While I would argue that this point is as accurate and that a critical assessment of why American liberals feel so compelled to "other" Murdoch in this way is warranted, the thought nevertheless arrives with a self-conscious ping of having been myself caught out; "You may be right, but why do you care about this as much as you do?" In the face of this question, after all the satisfying critical assessments that justify my irritation have been boiled away, there is a residual recognition that I am affected by the context from which I think in ways that run deeper than I would happily admit.

Following what we have seen in the work of writers such as Moreton-Robson, Harris, and Mignolo, it is clear that any gesture towards the de-personalisation of thought is at best a useful fiction and at worst a act of total self-negation. Any act of intellectual and creative work, individual or collective, always involves something of the self and its place within an ecological meshwork of feelings, desires, sensitivies, and discussions. Phenomenologically, the work of thinking and writing can perhaps be described as a journey into the embodied self in which we encounter ideas and associations that are always already both social and personal, public and private, familiar and strange, comforting and unsettling. This is an image in contrast to the Enlightenment ideal of a detached and depersonalised notion of rationality -- a de-relationalised rationality -- that stands as a marker and model legitimate thought and proper character. Susan Stewart describes the tension well when she says that in Enlightenment thought the "quest for detachment, for objectivity, was struggling against the tendency of the world to create binding attachments, obligations and influences." Here we can recall the figure of Descartes who, nothwithstanding the militaristised-theological culture that persuaded him to pursue a method that spoke of expelling the senses, was himself not beyond recognising that the work of thought was "arduous", a tell that signals the manner in which rigorous thought exacts a physical and psychic toll, even on those who appear anxious to deny the significance of the body and its relationality.

This thought leads to the question of what it means to think a thing or a process that is a part of structuring one's own thought and action, a question that is some respects a quintessential concern of ontological designing. As Heidegger once observed, this turning in on one's self -- the question of the ground of one's being -- carries the risk of unleashing an image of a viscious circularity, one that pitches the task of thinking into the space of the impossible and meaningless. Circularity as a constricting spiral, itself a potential object of fixation, relies upon a notion of identy that ignores its knots, fissures, and cracks, as well as the presence and value of critical estrangement. The constricting image of circularity assumes that the point from which the trace departs and returns represents something always already coherent and totalised as opposed to decentered, dispersed, contingent, and incomplete. This circular nihilism fails to acknowledge that despite whatever groove we might find ourselves in the possibilities of experience that each of us live are never reducible to a single logic or total image. There is always a surplus of meaning that runs ahead of and in excess of both language and rationalisation, an excess of feeing and thought that persistently looks to destabilise the sureity of rational(ised) discourse.

In this light, my turn towards thinking the relation between ontological designing, coloniality and Australia aims at a critical confrontation with dimensions of what I find most unsettling about the society that made me who I am, that is, as the member of settler class who finds their time, place, and being-in-the-world unsettling. The experience of unsettlement I am trying to evoke is itself one that is both unsettled and unsettling, an experience that does not rest at any particular moment in the in past, present, or future, but which modifies the experience of temporality itself. As the examination proceeds my intention is not to treat the presence of this sense of trouble and estrangement as the "saving grace" of a damaged, unsustainable, but otherwise "well meaning" settler-colonial society. Rather, my goal is to do the best I can to allow a sense of unsettlement to disclose the potential for alternatives to rather for the present situation. This is an exercise in learning to think and work with unsettlement as a complex but, I argue, necessary response to the coloniality of power.

In this section my goal is to make sense of coloniality and design as the coloniality of design, and to do so in a way that is relevant to an Australian context. This task begins by situating my own concerns in relation to previous work by Tony Fry on Australian design history and the political-geography of marginalisation, and Anne-Marie Willis on the question of Australian nationalism and identity. After clarify points of insight and significance in relation these texts my discussion moves on to an engagement with the work of work of Ghassan Hage, Aileen Moreton-Robinson, and Angela Mitropoulos from whom I develop an argument concerning the white nationalism as a mode of ontological designing.

## Thinking from and Australia

Fry completed his doctoral thesis on design history in 1984 at the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies at the University of Birmingham. Shortly afterwards he relocated to the Power Institute (an arts research institute) at the University of Sydney. By the late 1980s he began publishing critical studies of the significance of practicing design history from and about the Australian context. At the heart of Fry's concern was an interest in taking seriously the question of place, position and its relation to both thought, experience, and design. In light of the previous section this can be read as the expression of a conern with the locus of enunciation, that is, a concern not simply with the content of thought but with the positions and relations that are affected by speaking from where you are. Further, while this work comes before Fry's takeup of the notion of ontological designing it is still possible to read into Fry's concern a sensitivity to the ontological power of design discourses to orient thinking, direction, recognitionition, interest, and value -- the ontological designing of theoretical design discourse.

In a paper from 1989, "A Geography of Power: Design History and Marginality" Fry examined his interest in location through the theme of marginality. Fry's treatement of this theme encompasses a recognition that:
1. the discipline of design history -- the place from which Fry himself takes up and directs his thinking -- "exists in and produces conditions of marginality"
2. marginality, as the "other" of centrality, has multiple modes of thought and configuration, including
  a. space, as a location at the edge of empire or nation
  b. power, whereby marginality marks a condition of powerlessness
  c. as a condition of isolation, inbetweenness, and ineffectuality, in which the "other" of marginaltion is "a network, a system of circulation, or a community of knowledge that can finction in concentrated or dispersed forms."

This final configuration of marignality perhaps the most complex to understand but for Fry it encompasses relations of exchange that makes use of "a material or a symbolic object, an agency, and a plurality of social actors." This arrangement can be configured as a geography because every element of the network of exchange exists as a relation towards others. Within this configuration marginality represents "being on the edge or outside of the relations exchange." This leads on to a third point, that

3. writing from Australia means forming statements from a place that is at the margin of a discipline.

Australia is, as Fry puts it, "on the edge of the "developed" world". Considering the manner in which design is often concieved and taught through a focus on industrialisation, Australia's size and historically peripheral position within globalised industrial supply chains places it well an truly at the edge of the Eurocentric story of the coming into being of "design." Australia's marginality is expressed not simply in terms of the central attention given to events, movements, and ideas in Europe and the United States, but also in the appeals to relevance that are based around modernist design historical conventions, including discourses of the iconic (the Sydney Opera House, the Sydney Harbour Bridge) and technical innovation (the stump-jump plow, the Victor mower). Far from making "Australia" relevant to the central discussions of design studies, this mode of playing up to conventions and tropes that are established and governed from the core of the global world system has the effect of revealing "Australian" design's marginal and largely extraneous significance to the field as a whole. Thus, while Australian based intellectuals, industries, and governmental players are able to generate profitable versions of modernist Eurocentric design discourses, these discourses themselves function as means of disciplining interpretations of what design is concieved to be, how it works, what counts as good or representative, and what is passed over as irrelevant, nonsense, or impossible. Despite its problems, the recognition of this structure is something that Fry views as a useful insight into the politics of theorising design: "What a critical view from Australia delivers is a consciousness of just how flawed is the universal model of knolwedge and history upon which the assumptions of the history of design rests." In this respect Fry poses the question of the condition of Australian marginality as a point of leverage with which to tease open assumptions that are foundational not only to how design and its study is conceived but to the larger enterprise of theory itself. As he writes in one of his points of conclusion:

>A nonuniversal design history is not simply an additional or supplemental approach within a plurality of positions. Rather, it is a fundamental challenge to the nature and authority of the current Eurocentric model of history writing.

Fry's insight at into the complexity and power of marginalisation within the discourse of design history foreshadows more recent work by the Australian based critical sociologist Raewyn Connell. In an echo of what  Quijano views on the colonial politics of knowledge, Connell argues that modern social theory has been structured according to an international division of labour in which Europe and Eurocentric thinking acts as both a network for sourcing and accumulating the data and as the sovereign custodian of the terms by which this data interpreted. The image at play here is version of the world-systems model in which peripheral states (the Global South) are given the role of sourcing and supplying the raw materials for the affluent economies of the industrialised core (the Global North).

In making this argument Connell draws upon the work of Beninese philosopher Paulin Hountondji to suggest that the effect of this dynamic on how subjects of the South think is one of epistemological _extroversion_, that is, the manner of thinking one's marginal situation through the concepts and discourses of a central power. The world-system critique of modernisation theory is again useful: just as the modernisation theory of development required economies of the South to fund the ongoing domination of the North through the purchase of the North's more capital intensive technologies, so too are thinkers from the South epistemologically disabled by a system that posits capital intensive, Northern knowledge as an essential element of the South's epistemological "development." The situation thus represents a case of both epistemological and economic domination by means of the actual material relations of knowledge production. The conditon is one in which the peripheral or colonised subject is forced to interpret their experiences through ideas and concepts developed by and for the benefit of an economic core without any capacity to either answer back or enter into a more reciprocal relation.

Fry's analysis of the relation between the ability of design history to marginalise certain spaces, ideas, and actors, and the relative marginalisation of Australia with respect to the world-system core has has a strong affinity with Hountondji's concept of extroversion and Connell's description of an imperial division of labour. What warrants recognition, however, is some of the complexity and differential nature of this condition. While Australian thinkers in general can certainly be described as "extroverted" with respect to European systems of thought, Australia, as a settler-colonial state, is not "post-colonial" in the same sense as Hountondji's Benin, and its status as member of the "South" is at best ambigious if not entirely tenuous. Australia is relatively wealthy, US alied "medium power" whose population at large continues to derive material benefit and comfort from its priviledged position within the world political, economic, and cultural system. There are of course serious and significant exceptions to the this picture but the general point to make here is that while Australian thinkers may be subject to extroversion, most -- particularly those of the settler class who identify as white, Western, European, or Anglo-Celtic -- do not experience extroversion as a problem and are not directly harmed in the same sense that Hountondji was concerned with in his own situation.

The contention here is that while the concept of "extroversion" illuminates something that rings true with respect to the onto-epistemological politics of design history and social theory, there is at same time risk of flattening an important colonial difference. Part of the difficulty lies in the fact that -- as Connell herself shows -- Hountondji's concept took form in the context of contentious debates over the meaning and direction of "African" philosophy and the prospects and meaning of an alternative to "European" sciences and technology. These debates involved complex discussions over notions of epistemological autonomy, "scientific" versus "traditional" knowledge, and racial essentialism that have no real equivalent within Australia's dominant settler class. While there are certainly similar and important debates that occur within and about, for example, critical Indigenous studies, the point that requires acknolwedgment is that this level and tone of questioning is not and has never been a feature of the Australian settler class. The closest we might get to such questioning in this domain revolves predominantly around the questions of "the national interest", "our place in Asia", the benefits of economic liberalism versus corporatism, and the perenial debate concerning Australian republicanism. While these debates are not incidental to questions of design and coloniality, the basic point is that they center around the self-involved interests, anxieties, and hopes of the settler class that has always sustained its position as an ally and benificiary of the coloniality of power. The Australian settler class is dominated in the sense of a priviledged side-kick or deputy to those with the power to direct the colonial matrix. The question of Australia's place within the "South" and as a potential site of decolonial thinking can only be taken seriously if onto-epistemic divide between settler class and its racialised others is acknolwedged.

These considerations are not intended to totalise the contradictions and ambivialences of settler class identity but, rather, to suggest that Australia is a site in which lines of racial affiliation and fracture need to be accounted for when translating concepts from discussions in other locations. In this respect Connell provides a very useful discription of the Australian settler class' tendency to vascilate between the experience of the "cultural cringe" -- a term coined by Australian literary critic A.A. Phillips to capture the sense of an impossible yearning for a Eurocentric mode of cultural performance and recognition -- and "outbursts of nationalism and searches for local grounding." However, while this may ring true as an experience for those dealing with a sense of having been abandonded or forgotten by an object of identity, desire, and admiration, it is at the same the experience of a class that systematically dominates and disrupts the capacity of those who occupy the same terrority but with different forms of social experience, cultural memory, and cross-border affiliation to experience safety, belonging, and homeliness. The tension between the "cultural cringe" and "local grounding" can thus be acknowledged as a real concern for the settler class, but it is one that articulates the settler class as a class in difference and distinction from those it dominates.

Through reading Fry and Connell we enter into a discussion about the configuration and effects of coloniality on the ways in which questions of design and sociality can and should be thought. In this respect Fry's discussion of marginality resonates very closely with Connell's argument concerning the international division of intellecual labour and the associated extroversion this brings about. While this thinking is useful for gaining some perspective on the terms and complexities of theorising design from an Australian locus of enunciation, my contention at this point is that more work needs to be done to confront some of the problems that are specific to Australia as a settler-colonial society. More precisely I think the question of colonial difference as codified in a specifically settler-colonial form of domination and exclusion requires further attention. The argument I make in the later part of this section is that the ontological designing of coloniality in Australia needs to be understood as part of an ongoing effort to enact a mode of dwelling defined as a search for security and comfort against the threat of racialised others.

## The question of nationalism

A second text that offers useful insight into thinking in and from Australia is Willis' _Illusions of Identity: the Art of Nation_. This text was published four years after Fry's text on marginality but can similarly characterised as a contribution to a theory of the ontological designing of Australian nationalism. An engagement with Willis' text is particularly useful for setting up a discussion of the relationality that exists between configurations of racism, nationalism, and identity. Here I am interested in two aspects of this work, the way in which Willis frames the question of nationalism in relation to visual culture, and the manner in which she addresses the issues of racial othering.

Willis' argument in _Illusions of Identity_ is structured around an interest in rethinking the ways in which the visual imagery of nationhood is studied. In doing so, Willis confronts a problem of relevance to my own interest in thinking the coloniality of design both from and of Australia. In Willis' case the problem is stated as question of the sense in which visual imagery be said to "belong" to a nation. Willis probes this issue with a series of questions around what constitues Australian-ness, the apparent complications of multiculturalism, and the value of addressing visual culture through the frame of nationhood in an age in which images appear to flow freely across borders. Perhaps the most pertinent question for us, however, is the final one that Willis offers: "Is 'nation' the most appropriateamd effective figure around which to cluster projects of cultural self-determination?"

The central object of study in _Illusions of Identity_ is the meaning and effects of the category of "Australian art" in the production of visual culture rather than the content of the "Australian art" as such. In this respect Willis studies "Australian art" in order to question the coherence of the concept and to place the problematic and its effects in the context of a broader political-economic context. As  Willis puts it, to approach any form of inquiry through the concept of "nation" is to "become caught up in a web of assumptions" that are for the most part taken for granted, at least for those artists, audiences, and intellectuals with an unexamined dispositional investment in maintaining the value and naturalness of a national identity. The phenomena that Willis is looking to pinpoint here is not so much the obvious and cases of national chauvinism so much as a deeper and more pervasive naturalisation of the fundamental need and goodness of national belonging. This phenenomena is, a Willis describes it, closely linked to the condition and effects of marginality discussed above: "An unstated nationalism, then, often operates as a taken-for-granted base for activites of intellectuals, this being particularly the case in cultures that have a sense of being peripheral".

Willis argues that appeals to the idea and ideals of Australian nationhood are often evoked with a air of simplicity and obviousness that fail to hold under critical questioning. In turning over the question of definition Willis contrasts "concrete" notions (bounded territory, political entity, and unit of adminstration) with more idealistic or romantic tropes ("the land we love", "one but many", "united in common goals") so as to pose the question of which version of nationhood could be considered the most "real".

Taking on the idea of bounded space, Willis questions the factual status the nation's border. Unlike most countries in the world Australia is typically understood to be an island nation whose borders trace a single and iconically shaped body of land. Willis notes, however, that this image of a cohesive and well recognised whole is not the neutral product of physical geography but, rather, a discipline of mapping that is deeply entwined with the history of imperial exploration and military strategy. The "bounded" space in this respect is a convention of visual representation that has obtained the status of a symbol of identity and indentification. As Willis argues, this represents a "culturally specific competence in reading such signs", meaning that this mode of visualising the nation as a bounded territory is the mark of a particular locus of enunciation and not a foundational certainty located outside the contestations of culture, politics, or economics. On the contrary, the image and ideal of the bounded national territory is itself the contingent and mutable product of contested practices of representation, political alliances, economic interest. In this respect a brief look at the history of how Eurpean powers mapped Australia is instructive.

# Historical detour: the Saragossa line and its imaginary

From the perspective of the colonial matrix and the imperial difference this history of contestation over Australia's borders begins neither with the British explorations in the eighteenth-century nor with the Dutch exploration of the seventeenth-century but, rather, with the early construction of the modern/colonial system of international law in the sixteenth-century. The critical event here is the Treaty of Saragossa of 1529 that secured agreement between the Spanish and Portugese monarchs over rights to exploration and colonisation within the Asia-Pacific region. The source of the dispute between the European powers was a rival claim over the right to colonise the Maluku Islands, an archipelogo that is now part of present day Indonesia. More broadly, the terms of the dispute represents a logical development on the 1492 Treaty of Tordesillas in which a similar dispute over rights of conquest in the Americas had been resolved thought the invention of a line that divided the proto-Eurpean representation of the globe into Portugese and Spanish spheres of influence -- the historical basis of our contemprary conception of Western and Eastern hemispheres or, as Mignolo has argued, the origins of the invention of Occidentalism. The Treaty of Tordesillas is commonly recognised as the foundational mark of the modern/colonial system of international law. As a development on this order, the Treaty of Saragossa established the Pacific region equivalent of what had been established in 1492. The Saragossa line functioned as a means of resolve the inter-imperial dispute over the Maluku Islands while at the same time setting the terms for future contests amongst European powers. Nothwithstanding its various complications and violations, the Saragossa treaty established a geopolitical division and implied right of possession in the minds of all European powers that has ongoing implications for the coherence of Australian nationalism.

As the power of Portugese and Spanish influence begain to decline their stake in the imaginary that sustained the European system of international law was adopted and extended by Dutch, French, and British interests. For instance, the fact that Dutch explorers had charted the western coastline and established a claim to "New Holland", the intitial pitch for possession of the eastern coastline by the British in 1770 was designed to extend only so far as the Saragossa line. The reasoning behind the decision rested upon the assumption that the division invented by the Spanish and Portugese formed the basis of a common order through which inter-imperial war and competition could be regulated. The European imaginary of the continent its law was thus constructed around a hemispheric and political division. This continential imaginary, however, was at the same time unified by a notion of a right to possession that disregarded the law, visual culture, and spatial imaginary of the Indigenous populations. While the precise positioning of the Saragossa may have been subject to change -- in 1825 the British shifted the border of their claim 6° westward -- the image of the division itself continued to influence the territorial imaginary of the colonial administration. It had in effect been inscribed into structure of European imperial practice.

Dutch powers failed to establish a colony on the western coastline. By 1829 their claim was finally defeated with the founding by the British of the Swan River Colony, a move that effectively secured sole British possession of the continent. In 1832 the new colony was renamed "Western Australia" and until the creation of South Australia in 1836 it, along with the New South Wales, represented one of only two mainland adminstrative regions. As New South Wales continued to be devided into smaller territories and states the line that defined Western Australia as a single and cohesive state remained undisturbed.

The Saragossa line that was drawn in 1529 thus underpinned the play of division and identity that structured the European geopolitical imaginary of "Australia". While there were many factors at play in events leading up to the federation of the Australian colonies in 1901 it is still of interest to note the extent to which the East/West division underscored competing visions that continue to have resonance. By the time of the federation campaign the established Western Austalian settler class had developed a distinct identity that was grounded in an opposition between local "sandgropers" and migrant "t'othersiders" who had moved from the eastern colonies to take advantage of a western mining boom. This fueled a sharp political divsion on the question of federation. While the western federalists eventually won out there were moments in which it seemed that the eastern states would decided to federate without the inclusion of Western Australia. The issue erupted again in context of the depression of 1930. A referedum held in 1933 established a two thirds majority support for sucession but hampered by there being no legal provision for exiting the federation. The movement finally collapsed following a decision on the part of the UK House of Commons not to consider the matter after successionsts petitioned to overturn the Act that had initially established the Australian Federation. Today the image of Western Australian indepedence continues to mobilised in disputes over federal taxes and trade regulations, a performance that hints at both the endurance of Saragossa division and the persistent contigency of territorial unity. The story of the Saragossa line not only places the history of Australian settler-colonialism in the context of the early formation of the colonial matrix, it also demonstrates Willis' point that while "Australia as nation" and "Australia as landmass" may seem to coincide the two are indeed distinct configurations that are capable of separtion and disintegration, both as image and law.

# The nation as image

Willis' questioning of the nation as a bounded space proceeds as a self-conscious movement between the image of the nation and the nation as image. The difference at stake in these two notions is an assumption that image of the Australian landmass speaks to a coherent, quasi-natural foundation to the nation-state as opposed to a mutable and relationally constituted sign without a stable or fixed meaning. The nation as image is "an unbounded collection of signs" without a "perfect form" or "empirical reality" to function as a reliable anchor or reference point.  The sign of the nation is in this sense something that is always encountered intertextually, that is, as a situated re-presentation that obtains meaning both through the arrangement of elements in the visual -- which could be as varied as a tourist postcard, a business logo, a festival poster etc. -- as well pervasive visual conventions and associations that either individual elements or the design as a whole might reference. Pushing the argument further, Willis argues against the assumption that movement at play in any such example is instance of "representing" the nation. Rather, in each case it the convention of nation as image that is appropriated for and within a particular field of operation. The nation as image is thus a pliable resource grounded in other than its variable but repeted expressions as a genre of indentity.

# The strange materiality of nationalism

Having shown that the image of nation as bounded space points to a play of signification rather than any concrete foundation, Willis turns to the question the nation as political entity. Here Willis makes a distinction between 'nation' and 'state' in order to argue that the notion of the state as the natural protector and defender of the organically formed nation ought to be reveresed: rather than being the protector of nation the state is more an assemblage of governing institutions that reserves the power to deploy the figure of the nation as its own symbolic and affectual form. Willis includes a salient line from Gellner (via Benedict Anderson's landmark study _Imagined Communities_): "nationalism is not the awakening of the nations to self-consiousness: it _invents_ nation where they do not exist". Along with her assertion that the concept of nation functions as designed symbolic rather than "natural" object of reference, Willis maintains that nationalism, as a system of affect, identification, and belief, holds within it a potential for mobilisation that is of profound material consequence. The expressions and consequences of nationalism are varied and complex but, as Anderson observes, perhaps one its most startling strengths is the capacity to produce not only a willingness to kill other people but a reason for dying.

Nationalism manifests a power that seems to be at odds with the common prejudice against "mere" symbolism. The confusion to unpack here is the difference between the efficacy of rational critique and the force of (other forms of) ontological designing. Anderson brings us close to the issue in his reflection on the significance of the tomb of the Unknown Soldier as a convention of nationalist war memorialisation. Such memorials are signifant not simply in and of themselves but for the role they play in public rituals of reverence and honor for those who have, it is said, made ultimate sacrifice for sake of nation and its values. The ritual dimension of memorialisation enables what are for the most part rather simple and austere objects to become imbued with deep socio-existential significance. As Anderson argues, the themes and affective structure that coheres around the Unknown Soldier suggests a strong affinity between nationalist and religious imaginings. In each configuration, stories and rituals of structure a world of significance in which individual can explore the grave profundity of being, encounter the meaning of their mortality, and contemplate a model of virtue and glory speaks to life after death in the company of the ancestors. The tomb of the Unkown Soldier thus functions as a point of focus and embodied intensity within the ontological designing of a nationalist for-the-sake-of-which.

This phenomena can be considered in contrast to tradition of Liberal and Marxist thought. As Anderson observes, there is something absurd in the idea of a "Tomb of the Unknown Marxist or a ceotaph for fallen Liberals" that speaks to the particular form and power of nationalism. For Anderson this has something to do with the manner in nationalism evokes the significance of death, mortality, collectivity, and other themes in a manner that is distinctly existential or experiential rather than philosophically rational. Nationalism differs from traditions of Liberal and Marxist thinking in not making any appeal modes of principled argumentation. While Marxism differs from Liberalism by staking its claims in the particular interests of the proletariat, its classical formulation is still grounded in an image of an objective or scientific mode of discourse. A fair objection could be made here on grounds that neither Marxism nor Liberalism operate as fully disembodied rational discourses, and that fact that both traditions of thought have inspired a range of imaginaries, rituals, and practices of memorialisation. A committed Liberal or Marxist may try to interpret the world in objecive terms but neither is lacking in any sense of historical purpose. Neither is there an easy way to separate between nationalist tropes and some of the varied political movements that take their inspiration from either of Liberal and Marxist discourse. While each tradition has its debates over the metaphysical and strategic tensions over universalist ideals and historic particularism, there is an empirical case to be made for how elements of both traditions draw upon and into the power of nationalist ideology (or similar existential tropes) as a dimension of political practice. What this objection misses however is the significance of nationalism itself having no equivalent intellectual tradition to Marxism and Liberalism. While various candidates might be assembled -- Machiavelli, Hobbes, Rousseau, Kant, Hegel, Schmitt etc. -- this is properly speaking a list of liberal or conservative theorists of law, politics, or statecraft. Nationalism itself is not organised as a rational discourse and so does spring from or refer back to a classical philosophical canon.

The point of significance to observe here is the distinction that Pierre Bourdieu draws between "scholastic" and "practical" modes of thought, a distinction that is arguably of as much importance to theorists and practitioners of design as it is for anthropologists. Here the scholastic mode can be read as an expression of the Enlightenment ideal of detatchment, rationality, and transparency that underscores most forms of scholarly performance. In Bourdieu's terms, scholasticism functions as an a closed or autonmous field of practice that coheres aroudn the trade of a rational form critique that is too often mistaken for a priviledged or "correct" point of perspective on "reality". While the political significance of Liberal or Marxist discourse cannot be reduced to its scholastic expressions, the point that Anderson helps to clarify in his reflection on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier is the extent to which the ontological designing of nationalism lays waste to the assumption that social phenomena are best understood and addressed through the ideal of rational discourse. As Willis suggests, nationality is more often than not such an embedded part of persons sense of self that it is effectively to impossible, even for critical thinkers, to gain an absolute sense of separation from it. The nation as image may frame the concept of nation as intangible and unstable but it would be an error to infer that the metaphysical inchorence of "the nation" somehow negates its affective force, a force that is, as Angela Mitropous argues, of material consequence regardless of how intagible it may seem. As she puts it: "We think of materiality as tangible objects when often the most intense material connection occurs through the intensification of affect."

# White nationalism as being-in-the-word

Bourdieu's notion of "scholasticism" carries within itself a certain self-aware or reflexive irony in so far as the distinction is a product of the scholastic locus of enunciation from which it derives value and meaning. The term is significant not as term of anti-intellectualism but as an intellectualist way of marking out the terms and social conditions of success and limitation for this mode of thought. The scholastic critique of scholasticism is an intellectualist way of reminding intellectuals that the categories and expressions of their practice are but one (socially priviledged) way of making sense of experiences and processess that exceed the terms any single mode of representation. It is no suprise to find that Bourdieu's reflections on the nature of our not being able to think beyond or without the aid of naturalised-artificial orders of signification has found resonance in the work of both ontological designing and decolonial thinking (Fry, Mignolo).

Bourdieu's call to consider social dynamics from the perspective of their embodied, unreflective, and practical logics rather than as explicit or rationalisable models of behaviour opens out a space of reflection in which nationalism may be studied as a mode of being-in-the-world that is both designed and designing. A substantial foundation for this thinking can already be found in the critical anthropology of Ghassan Hage. While Hage's project is not without its problems, his manner of conceptualising the connection between nationalism, racism, and ecological crises though the theme of domesticity is of great value to task of theorising the coloniality of design in an Australian context.







The discussion of nationalism has so far laid

"ethnocentrism operates at a naturalised level"

"The defining of Otherness proceeds from an ethnocentric basis in which Others of the world are viewed from the system of value of the cuture doin gthe defining."









both to the idea of domesticity and to the place from which I think and act. The task of this section is to generate some insight into the condition of coloniality in Australia in such a way that brings out the agency of design. Specifically I am concerned with design agency as ontological designing or the designerly capacity to shape and direct ways of being-in-the-world. As the sections above make clear,

The question is how does design play a role in forming the white nationalist settler-colonial ontology. In speaking of this as an ontology my intention is go beyond scope of an explanation that views racism as a problem of absent, negative, or stereotypical representation. This is not to say that the dehumanisation of racialised peoples via representational media such as literature, painting, photography, film, advertising, and television is not relevant to the phenomena of racism. These expressions are deeply relevent but they are not the entire story. The basic point is that racism is as much about space and embodiment, of feeling or affect, of dispositions to act or respond.

Another way to describe the frame that I am trying to avoid is to treat racism as the product of a false epistemology. To treat  More precisely, the task is to examine how representation participates in the systemitisation of racial domination

Representational forms are supports for cultures and practices of racism. Racism is has a practical rather than intellectual logic. It is embodied in prelinguistic ways of doing things. It is revin

What is a racist culture, what is a racist practice? There are a plurality of practices that we can call racist.

Structuring yourself as a warring society.
Questioning and position taking. No commonality with the other. Scared of sameness with the other.
How to work in warring societies. Writing for an audience that is reading to see if you know what they know.
Warriors claim a monopoly over reality.
Reality is made up of what is actual and what is potential.


One of the problems with Mignolo's account is that it appears to be rather static.
Hage describes how colonial culture moves between different modalities of oppression.

Heidegger experienced the Jew as a figure of domination. Heidegger's was a fascist response to the upheavals of modernity, an effort to re-impose the order of the German household as the shelter of being. Heidegger's is not a simple account. He was sensitive to complexity and relationality, and held close to the unsettling idea that in order to be at home we must be willful.

The philosophies of Heidegger and Levinas could perhaps be ploted as the contrary points on a line between being and





The question that I have been struggling with is how to make my design-/intellectual practice relevant to the ...

how does design contribute to sustainment of a situation that is both unjust and unsustainable, and is there some connection between the two?

It is one thing to engage in intellectual debate over.

"we are all traversed by noth centrifugal and centripetal forces and we are continuously struggling to pull ourselves together."

thinking in terms of multiple realities, politics as a struggle between realities and not just a struggle over a single reality.

Imaginary. "Third world looking person."

The exterminable as living corpse.

The concentration camp is not the place in which people are prepared for extermination, nor is it where

## What hope is there?

Hope is the ability to fashion the kind of positive affect that makes actioni possible. Action is an inherently hopeful phenomena.

## One response to Domestication

We need to shift towards modes of being-with. White nationalist and civilisationalist identities will have to give up the notion of sole possession.

There is a place for being-for-me/us. Being-for-me/us is an expression of the will to self-preservation, an instantiation of the right to be.

The relation between being-for and being-with.

Moderation, respect.

## Crisis

We are thinking through different levels, expressions, and experiences of crisis.

The ecological is the most general. To say it is the most general is not to say that the crisis is equally felt, nor is it to say that it has the form of a rational or rationalisable totality.The ecological crisis is a crisis of plural formations and processes in a relation of relationality, the complexity of which is beyond any system of modeling or representation. Importantly, the ecological crisis is not a crisis of an delimited sphere called the 'environment' that stands outside or apart from us but is, rather, something that encapsulates every dimension of what human being is and depends upon. The ecological crisis is a crisis of enmeshment that structures our very ability to think it. While the ecological crisis is a crisis of human being it is by its very nature not a unifying crisis. Without diminishing the value of various 'ecological' struggles, the ecological crisis is not the crisis of an objectifiable enemy.

The ecological crisis is an ontological crisis, the crisis of an ability to be-with as a condition of being. The ecological crisis is a crisis of everything. It is a deep, pervasive, and all encompassing. The ecological crisis has no outside and provides no kind interior space that is not also a part of the crisis. The crisis is of our air, our food, our shelter, our conversations, our dreams and desires. Its expressions is both aggression and submissiveness.

## Critique

Hage's argument:

Paranoid nationalism is different from what other kind of nationalism.

Paranoid nationalism expresses a fear of abandonment.

Hage builds his argument from the perspective of someone who experiences belonging. The idea of the 'national cuddle' takes on a perverse.

By Hage's account Australian nationalism offers

"paranoid nationalism is primarily the product of 'the decline of hope' in an era where the dynamics of capital "

Hage claims that Australia's Indigenous people "are no longer capable of engaging in any significant anti-colonial political practices" of the kind seen in apartheid South Africa or against the state of Israel. Hage qualifies this claim by suggesting that while there are practices that "can be seen as 'anti-colonial'", these do not amount to a "serious" movement to regain sovereignty over Australian territory. Hage compares this situation with the United States in order to draw out what is to him a peculiar, perhaps even unwarranted unease.

There are several problems with this characterisation. It seems clear that Hage is using the word "serious" in the sense of not taken seriously as a threat to the settler nation-state, for it is certainly the case that Indigenous sovereignty is treated as a serious issue by Indigenous groups.

##


## Moreton-Robinson

Moreton-Robinson has written that "Migrancy and dispossession indelibly mark configurations of belonging, home, and place in the "


## Fry on the home

Fry views the home in terms of 'dwelling'.

"We live in the disjuncture between the comfort of the notion of home, and its violence."
