---
layout: post
title: Notes on Automation and Services
author: worlding
tags: Automation services
eye_catch:
---
http://brooklynrail.org/2017/04/field-notes/Nowhere-to-Go-Automation-Then-and-Now-Part-Two

>Any honest reckoning with the so-called service sector must begin by underlining that the category itself barely stands up to scrutiny. Said to comprise four-fifths of employment in the U.S. and similar high-income countries, it lumps together an enormous number of economic activities that differ in wage and skill level, location, size of enterprise, and capital-to-labor ratios. Its definition is largely negative, including anything deemed neither agriculture (farming, but also forestry and fishing), nor industry (manufacturing, but also construction and mining). A deep rift runs through the vast range of service sector occupations, between so-called business or professional services, on the one hand, and consumer or personal services on the other. The former are “intermediate inputs” provided directly to businesses, often manufacturing firms; the latter are sold to consumers able to afford them. Among the first we find an array of activities, be they design, accounting, custodial, or clerical activities, not to mention transportation services. Historically, these tasks were organized “in-house” by large manufacturing firms, rather than contracted out to autonomous firms specializing in them. Over the past forty years or so, capitalist enterprises have tended to refine the detail division of labor in ways that allow them to externalize these tasks. (Thus Apple, to take a major example, owns no factories; only a tiny fraction of the retail cost of its products is derived from their outsourced assembly in China from parts produced elsewhere.) This leads statisticians who collect these data to assimilate these activities to services, though many of them—research and design are prime examples, but so are trucking and shipping—are part and parcel of an extended manufacturing process.17 If a significant fraction of what are counted as services by economists are in fact externalized segments of manufacturing, the statistical shift toward employment in services must be seen as at least in part an effect of an ever more ramified global division of labor.

>What is a service? Most accounts restrict themselves to the most formalistic of responses: a service is a commodity that is produced and consumed in the same instant or interval of time. What this often means is that a service produces no discrete or detachable object that can be kept and, say, sold in turn at a later time. Think of a massage: there is no discrete object exchanged, nor even a visible material change in my body; its consumption is inseparable from its production on the part of the masseur. In the case of a haircut—always the example in the literature on services—we have a material transformation exacted by the haircutter (the removal of hair), but the “object” thus produced is not detachable from my body: I cannot subsequently sell my haircut to a stranger, or even offer it as a gift to a friend. Because my haircut, even if it conforms to a prevailing style, must adhere to the specific dimensions of my head and its shape, it is difficult to standardize its production. The rationalization of such a service has material limits: it cannot be automated or mass-produced without the quality of the product suffering considerably. More pertinent examples of services that resist such capitalist rationalization—labor processes not subject to intricate divisions of labor, economies of scale, or the substitution of machines for labor—are found in education and health care. Teaching tends to involve one or at most two teachers per classroom, with no complex parsing of the labor process. Productivity gains are hard to achieve without undermining the nature of the service itself. More children can be added to the classroom, but at the expense of the quality of the instruction; the time of teaching cannot be sped up beyond certain rigid limits without a similar, deleterious, effect. Think, alternately, of a nurse specializing in physical therapy: here, too, the quality of the service will be diminished severely once the number of patients reaches a certain threshold, or the time of treatment is reduced beyond a bare minimum.
