---
layout: post
title: Decolonising Dasein
author: worlding
tags:
eye_catch:
---
## Unsettling design theory

The philosophy of Martin Heidegger has been a seminal source of insight for design theorists. [1] Thinkers associated with ontological designing such as Winograd and Flores, Fry, Willis, Tonkinwise, Lopes, Stewart, along with post-phenomenological theorists of technology such as Don Idhe, Peter-Paul Verbeek, Petran Kokelkoren, and Albert Borgmann have in varied ways drawn an understanding from Heidegger's work of the complex nature of our relation to and within our situated worlds of design. In this respect the understanding derived from Heidegger's work has proven to be of significant value to design theory. The particular usefulness of Heidegger's work centres for the most part on his way of articulating the ordinary but essential equipmentality of human existence, that is, our way of existing within, through, and by means of dynamic and relational ensembles of design. Heidegger's philosophy allows for an understanding of design _qua_ design, that is, from a perspective of interest in design as a distinctive kind of practice, knowledge, and socio-political agent. In a context in which what is uniquely powerful about design struggles to find expression amidst scientistic conceptions of technical innovation and aesthetic philosophies that centre the interests of the fine-arts, Heidegger's investigations into the subtle complexity of ordinary experience has provided design theorists with a means of establishing a theoretical grip on the uncanny significance of the naturalised-artificiality.

The value of these insights will be further elaborated below but for the purposes of this section they represent the set-up for a discussion of a different kind of problem, namely, what calls for rethinking in an attempt to move from a Heideggerian inflected conception of design towards an engagement with questions of (de)colonisation. The difficulty here resides in the relation between what strikes me as two distinct and competing political ontologies, namely, a commitment to the aims and values of decolonisation versus the increasingly well documented case of Heidegger's fascist political ontology. To pose the issue in a preliminary way, the question to confront is one of how to face, understand, and contend with a situation in which a way of thinking that has been experienced as a source of insight has a shadow cast upon it by its connection to both a detestable politics and a catastrophic event of colonial violence. [2]

Since the publication of Victor Farias' _Heidegger and Nazism_ in 1987 there has developed a large and still growing body of literature on the question of Heidegger's Nazism and its relation to his thought. Perspectives divide in various ways but the strongest lines of debate seem to be on the question of how committed Heidegger was to the National Socialist movement, as well as the extent to which it is either possible or legitimate to interpret and judge his philosophy in connection with his actions during the period of Nazi rule. I will not spend time on the details of Heidegger's involvement, nor will I engage in any effort to work over the various comments and silences from Heidegger himself or his defenders and sympathetic critics. It is enough for me to indicate that the scope and diversity of these responses has been usefully surveyed by Gregory Fried in his book _Heidegger's Polemos_ (2000). In Fried's terms these range from efforts at denial, to justification, condemnation, recuperation, and problematisation. In recent years the debate has been re-energised by the publication of the _Black Notebooks_, a collection of hitherto private notes from 1931-1941 that are significant for, as Peter Trawny has argued, shedding light on the material influence of Heidegger's anti-Semitism within several key themes of his philosophy, including his thinking on technology (Trawny 2014). While Trawny's argument limits the initial appearance of anti-Semitism in Heidegger's philosophy to the period of the 1930s his depiction is contested by Tom Rockmore who insists that anyone who cares to look will find signs of anti-Semitism present throughout entirety of Heidegger's corpus. Bottom line, it strikes me that the most significant point to contend with here -- at least for any serious political thinker who comes into contact with Heideggerian thought -- is one made by Fried: what are we to do with the understanding that it was by no accident that Heidegger's thinking lead him to fascism. Simply put, there is no possibility of learning from Heidegger unless, at the very least, we become sensitive to perceiving what is dangerous in his thought.

To pull back from this discussion for a moment it is worth considering the following response: if Heidegger and his thought is so troublesome why contend with it at all? Posing such a question provides us with the opportunity to check the error of assuming that any particular thinker could be more important than the political task for which call upon them to assist. On this front it is useful to clarify that Heidegger need not be defended as the singular or necessary patron of the insights that have otherwise been derived from him. To put this another way, developing a sensitivity towards the ontological nature of design is not something that of necessity requires an engagement with Heidegger. In one respect the condition of our being equipmental beings is, as Cameron Tonkinwise has argued, a more or less tacit assumption in the work of any designer, professional or otherwise. Here there is a way of saying that all practices of design embody at some level an understanding of equipmental being that Heidegger and his readers have fashioned into a object of inquiry that is derivative of how we actually experience design and designing. Moreover, it is both important and possible to recognise that aspects of what Heidegger's philosophy makes available to theory is manifest in the writing of many thinkers, including those positioned either within or beyond the influence of Heidegger himself, the discipline of philosophy, and the traditions of Western or European thought. There are other paths towards the kind of learning that Heidegger makes possible, paths that, to be clear, are of value not for being comparable to Heidegger but for what they reveal about the nature of design itself.

It is possible to acknowledge all of this, however, and remain unsatisfied with idea of abandoning a critical engagement with Heidegger. The error of presuming that there are theorists or philosopher whom we might read without issue is one thing, but the factor that I think presses the issue in a more compelling way is that so much of the design theory that I suggest is of value to the task of re-thinking design has already arrived via an engagement with Heidegger's thought. To put the issue as openly as I possibly can, I want to be able to acknowledge and explain why this work remains of value despite the faults of Heidegger. At the same time I want to acknowledging that the idea of decolonisation presses us to consider what possibilities for thinking have been covered over by the form disclosure that Heidegger enables. The issue here is not that reading Heidegger might lead us in some mechanistic fashion to adopt his politics but, rather, that a failure to articulate and think through the problems of his thought leaves us ill-equiped to theorise design from the actual place in which I/we am/are, that is, as theorists who are already influenced by a philosopher whose relationship to fascist thinking, whatever the complexity, is undeniable. Seeking insight from someone we consider "safer" without having considered the problem itself only works to defer and cover over questions that are required of a decolonial politics. Searching for insight amongst a diversity of thinkers is imperative, but so is acknowledging the detestable truth of a tradition of thought that holds within it things that remain important to us. Eliding the issue  via recourse to other thinkers would amount to displacing the kind of confrontation that brings to light what is at stake in the politics of decolonisation, which is nothing if not a call to reassess our relation to traditions as they are handed down and taken up, not only prior to critical thought but as a condition of its possibility. That said, in what follows part of what I hope to demonstrate is that alternative thinking and critical confrontation are not categorical opposites. Rather, it is by reading with those at the margins of thinking with and against Heidegger that we can come to see the possibility of an different possibility thinking/being/doing. Such thinking encourages us to hold on to what we find is of valuable in Heidegger but also leads us to face outwards from his thought and press into futures that run against the grain of his political ontology. The examples I work with in this case include Dorothy Leland's critical reading of Heidegger's account of the social, Tina Chanter's reading of the gendered norms of Heidegger's ontology, and Nelson Maldonado-Torres' perspective on the coloniality of being.

As final word before moving forward, it is worth emphasising the extent to which the problematic to be engaged here is far from new. The thinking to occur here occurs in the midst of work already done by many powerful and serious thinkers. Among them are Arendt and Levinas, whose relation to both Heidegger and the violence of German National Socialism was intimate. The scope of what we are looking to achieve here is not equal to the efforts of these thinkers even if the questions are in many respects similar. The reason for engaging this question again lies in the sense that I/we are obliged articulate a stance that takes heed of their thinking while also doing justice to the concrete particularity of my/our own time and place. This is to say that while there is a sense in which the kind of work to be done here is not new, it is also not possible to substitute it with work of any other thinker. The issue at hand is not one that can be put to rest simply because others have considered it because what is at stake in work of such thinking is not simply how we relate to Heidegger but how we relate to our selves and the world in which we encounter others to whom we are always already responsible. That we might feel called to take a stance on our existence in this way is of course an exemplar insight of Heideggerian thought. In this context it provides direction for facing the question of decolonising (and) design (theory) that is most proximal and, as a consequence, most difficult.

## Heidegger and design

The question to be answered in this part concerns what design theorists have learned from Heidegger. This involves considering Heideggerian insights in a generous light so as to provide a sense for what design theorists have been able achieve through their engagement with his thought. The point raised above concerning alternative sources of similar insight holds true but is not the focus of what I am looking to establish for the moment.

To provide a sense of what needs to be explained here we can consider what I suggest are two of the most significant insights that design theorists have derived from Heidegger's work, namely _equipmentality_ and _relationality_. In brief terms, equipmentality relates to what Cameron Tonkinwise has talked about as our _bethingedness_, that is, the manner in which our habitual involvement with the products of design is elemental to understanding both who/what we are and the manner in which we go about creating and recreating the naturalised-artificial environs of possibility in which we live. Designerly knowledge implies a developed awareness of the fact that an essential component of humaning --- following Tim Ingold's claim that "human" is verb not a noun --- is to be have an involved relationship with things, a relationship that makes humaning itself possible in all of its diversity and difference. Equipmentality informs that humaning is something of an uncanny coupling of thingliness and bios, a coupling that is so deep that its denial at either a practical or theoretical level amounts to a form of violence. To deprive humans of their things amounts to either a fundamental misunderstanding of how we work, or, in practice, a more or less violent act of depravation.

The relationality of design, meanwhile, concerns the relational holism of perception and experience. This insight informs us that designs are never encountered or taken up in atomised isolation. [3] Rather, the practical significance of a design is something composed in the flow of activity and a meshwork situational references. We encounter a combination of table and chair, for instance, as equipment for sitting at, either for work or some other activity, not as some brute assemblage of meaningless material. The ordinary meaning of a table might distort or break down in case in which it is damaged or somehow unsuitable to the situation at hand but it nevertheless sustains its meaning as broken or unsuitable with respect to whatever range of affordances we assume are appropriate to that specific context. An ugly, wobbly, or badly positioned table calls attention to itself as a problem in relation to whatever is expected of a table in the situation at hand. Even a table that has been thrown away, perhaps one that we find abandoned on a public footpath or uncovered at a tip, is still recognised and read for what it is on the basis of an existing totality of meaning. In the most extreme situation, say case in which a table has been physically deconstructed into parts and arranged such that it is no longer legible as a table, these parts are still encountered in terms of their possible affordances -- perhaps as scrap material for a construction project, as firewood, or even as something of no interest at all. The crucial point is that the concrete significance of the table or its component parts does not change in and of itself but, rather, in relation to the particular circumstances of the encounter. The meaning of any designed thing is therefore mutable or historical, a question of the particular role that a thing has been disposed to play in the context of what are, for the most part, mundane, everyday activities. The meaning at play here is practical and concrete, and so of material significance to structures and processes that operate beyond the scope of the meso-level domain of perception that constitutes our situation of interaction. Relationality also encompasses less tangible dimension of experience such as style, mood, or atmosphere that are absolutely essential to the sense of possibility inherent in whatever situation we find ourselves in. For someone who finds pleasure in the practice of repair and finds themselves in a receptive mood, for instance, an encounter with a broken table might trigger an affect curiosity and positive anticipation. The same person, however, could just as easily find themselves feeling alienated from the pleasure of manual work such that the very same table acts as a trigger for anger and frustration.

It is with these insights that design theory reveals how the agency of design lies in what it is able to make most familiar, available, obvious, and important to us, and that no matter how natural this may seem it is in every case a matter of ontological designing. In this capacity design must be read as practice that provides direction and inertia to social forces. When this is thought in relation to wider patterns and structures design can be seen as providing concrete determinations concerning the balance of destruction and creativity, violence and restoration, domination and respect, and the defutural and futural. This makes design something other than an idealist practice in the sense that most of its power lies in regulating the unreflective habits and impulses of daily life. Design in action is not a force that appeals to reason. Rather, it shapes the character of everyday significance and, as such, the direction of activity and processes. [4] The question to address here is how design theorists have been able to derive insights such as equipmentality and relationality from the work of Heidegger. The next step I take in this process will be to reconstruct the some of the arguments from Heidegger's thought, focusing mostly on his earlier and most influential work _Being and Time_ (1927). The purpose here is twofold: to explain the broader conceptual context for what design theorists have found useful in Heidegger's work while at the same time providing some of the ground work for examining later critiques.

# The Question of Being

Heidegger's project in its most general terms can be described as the recovery of the question of _being_ from within or beneath the "Western" philosophical tradition, or, more specifically, the tradition of metaphysics. [5][6] The concept of "being" in Heidegger can be difficult to come to grips with for as Anne-Marie Willis points out its meaning can easily confused for something like mystical type essence or some "supra-entity" such as Spirit or God. "Being", however, as distinct from individuated and plural "beings", is emphatically not an entity nor an essence, nor is it to be thought of as a substance, a process, or an event (Dreyfus 1991, p.xi). Rather, the definition for "being" given in _Being and Time_ is "that on the basis of which beings are already understood" (Heidegger 1962, pp.25-6). As the argument goes, the "that" upon which beings are understood is related not to something composed of implicit principles or rules that can be clarified and formally represented but, rather, the everyday know-how of embodied social practices. Our most fundamental way of making sense of things is grounded in what we do, in our activity, in our involvement with things. Hubert Dreyfus suggests that the significance of Heidegger's interest in "being" can be usefully described as an inquiry into the nature of our most concrete manner of intelligibility, a task that involves distinguishing between several different ways of being as they relate to and concern human being. The question that Heidegger asks of "being", therefore, relates to a story of our basic and practical way of relating to what shows up within the existence that matters to us.

The task that Heidegger sets himself in _Being and Time_ can be understood as effort to correct an error that he saw as fundamental and pervasive in both the philosophical tradition and in the way of thinking that dominated the modern world. This error was found in the assumption that the most coherent or rational way to talk about being is in terms of the substance ontology laid down by Aristotle. The relevant aspects of Aristotle's argument are worth looking at here as it informs us not only of what Heidegger was attempting to address in his work but also the metaphysical conceptions of classification, change, and identity that continue to have force today.

# Substance Ontology

Heidegger himself had great deal respect for Aristotle, particularly for the way in which Aristotle studied the phenomena of human action and conduct. Heidegger took issue, however, with Aristotle's approach to the question of being, or at least the manner in which the account given led to foreclosure on the question of being itself. The story can begin with those elements of Plato's conception of theory that carried over into Aristotle's metaphysics, something that was a problem both in itself and for the significant influence of Aristotle's metaphysics throughout the philosophical tradition. Plato is well known for promoting a mode of reflection that valorises detachment from the world as a method for producing knowledge that is certain and, therefore, of highest value. This approach assumes that the proper way to understand things is not to take reality at face value but, rather, to discern the ideal Form that lies behind mere appearance of things. Sensual experience represents a suspect source of knowledge as its being is merely a corrupt and unstable derivative of an absolute ideal, something that could only properly grasped via a process of rational abstraction. The Forms are universally and eternally correct and the task of philosophy is to derive their proofs and from them construct the most rational solution to any problem. It is by no accident that Plato's way of thinking stands out as a classical precursor to modernist aesthetics and theories of design.

Plato favoured a rational-idealist methodology in which the Forms can be derived through the technique of thought experiment and abstract logical reasoning. For a Platonist the highest priority in determining the being of beings is to discern the most general and perfect Form, something that was achieved by turning away from the appearance of things rather than towards them. As a student of Plato, Aristotle was heavily influenced by these ideas but in the process of his own work he found reason diverge on a number of core doctrines. Aristotle was more open to the approach taken by Democritus' materialist school of thought--a contemporary and rival of the Platonic school--and took an interest in deriving something of a synthesis between the two positions, that is, a philosophy that told a story of the relationship between identity (form) and change (matter) without reducing the reality one to the other. The result was the doctrine of _hylomorphism_, an account of how form acts upon matter so as to produce beings that are intelligible in their being. [7] Aristotle identifies this composite of form and matter as _substance_ (οὐσία, ousia) and it is with this concept that Aristotle defines the meaning of being. Being or intelligibility obtains in the substance of beings as the interaction of form and matter rather as an abstract Form that is absolutely devoid of all matter.

It is with this understanding Aristotle differs from Plato on the additional question of whether classes of things (e.g. apples) have ontological priority (are more real or intelligible) over individual entities (this particular apple). Plato of course gave priority to Forms but in Aristotle's system whatever is common or essential to individual entities of a particular class is that which gives intelligibility to the class as such. The essential properties of members of the class "apple" thus inhere in every individual instance of an apple such that a particular apple is perceived in its "appleness" regardless of whatever accidental or non-essential properties is may have, such as being in a bowl or rolling across a table. For Aristotle individual entities are more "truly" substantial for it is within individual entities that the greatest number of properties inhere. Higher order classes such as "species" or "genera" are distinct for helping to define the essential properties of a thing but they are nevertheless still "secondary" substances insofar as they inhere in individuals. The individualness of an individual does not inhere in anything else and so is considered to be a case of "primary" substance. The significance of this distinction can understood if we consider that there is, in a sense, more information available in a particular thing, the chair that you might be sitting on for instance, than there is in the concept of an abstract class such as "chairs". Likewise there is more information available in the concept of "chairs" than there is in the higher order class of "furniture", more information in "furniture" than in "made things" and so on and so on as the degree of abstraction is increased.

# The ontological designing of metaphysics

Aristotle's substance ontology is significant not simply as a point of departure for understanding the question of being in Heidegger's philosophy but for reasons that are relevant to the question of the relation between design and (de)coloniality. While I have tried to give a coherent representation of the most basic features of the doctrine there is a enormous history of commentary --- some major pre-modern figures being Al-Farabi, Avicenna, Averroes, Maimonides, Aquinas, Scotus --- devoted to teasing out and resolving the various ambiguities or "glitches" that have been discovered within the Aristotelian system. While the influence of Aristotle's thought throughout Greek, Arabic, and Latin speaking worlds waxed and waned across time and place, the impact of his substance ontology --- a work that is, as with Platos philisophy, devoted to developing the means by which to produce certain or indisputable knowledge of the world --- remains extensive both within and outside the discipline of philosophy. This history is a significant part of the history of systemitisation itself, something that is today expressed in many branches of science and research, including the various natural (e.g. physics, biology), social (politics, economics), and applied (medicine, engineering) sciences. The computer scientist John F. Sowa, for instance, has observed that

>Aristotle's method of defining new categories by genus and differentiae is fundamental to artificial intelligence, object-oriented systems, the semantic web, and every dictionary from the earliest days to the present. (Sowa 2001)

Sowa also points to quote from the rationalist philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz (1646-1716) that provides a sense for the enthusiasm with which the thinkers of the European Enlightenment took hold of and extended the reach of substance ontology:

>The art of ranking things in genera and species is of no small importance and very much assists our judgment as well as our memory. You know how much it matters in botany, not to mention animals and other substances, or again moral and notional entities as some call them. Order largely depends on it, and many good authors write in such a way that their whole account could be divided and subdivided according to a procedure related to genera and species. This helps one not merely to retain things, but also to find them. And those who have laid out all sorts of notions under certain headings or categories have done something very useful.

As Heidegger argued, in our modern times substance ontology has been established as the hegemonic mode of knowing and representing knowledge. It has become a habit of thought and discourse that takes on the sense of being the most natural, obvious, and intuitive way of interpreting the being of beings. As such it represents the effect of a particular form of ontological designing, that is, an outcome not of the way things actually "are" but of the kinds of embodied equipmental practices that make such thinking and its associated practices meaningful. Substance ontology shows up in everyday or "common sense" discussions that are oriented towards determining the nature of things as property bearing substances. For instance, to interpret the presence of a bird as an instance of a particular species in the context of a broader taxonomy of living beings, or to interpret the patterns of one's feelings and thoughts in view of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, is to think and act under the influence of an habitualised Aristotelian style metaphysics. Similarly, to think about physical geography in terms of a system of continents and regions, or of time as a system of epochs, is to adopt a metaphysical mode of interpretation. Expert practitioners of the relevant disciplines have a far more sophisticated understanding of competing models and their limits, limits that for the most part do not stand in the way of producing useful or valued knowledge.

The ontological designing of metaphysics that we are interested to make a point of here, however, holds regardless of whether or not the interpretation is correct with respect to any particular system. The effect in question lies not in conforming to any particular system but in having naturalised the habit of interpreting and speaking about beings in terms of properties, classes, taxonomies, models, co-ordinates etc. The significance of the metaphysical interpretation of being is also besides the point of whether or not such varieties of systematised knowledge are found to be useful or valuable. What is really at stake here in terms understanding both design and (de)coloniality is the assumption that knowledge is most valid when it can be represented or derived on the basis of either one system, a particular group of systems, or substance ontology as such.

Part of the argument that Heidegger looks to make in _Being and Time_ is that substance ontology represents a severely limited way of interpreting the being of beings particularly insofar as it renders us blind to the reality of pre- or non-theoretical interpretations of being. By framing the question of being as a matter of propositional statements, as a question of what we might claim to have being or not, the project of substance ontology misses out on the fact that we are always already with an understanding of the being of beings before the question of ontology is ever raised. Further, despite the effort at clarity derived from its supposition, the meaning "substance" in Aristotle's metaphysics remains ambigious (Heidegger 2002, p.17). Substance ontology thus encounters an internal problem of defining the essence of that which all other properties are supposed to inhere in, meaning that its claim to be able to derive certain knowledge about the world invariably shows up as being without an absolute rational foundation (see also Kurt Gödel's incompleteness theorem). In foreclosing on this problem the history of metaphysical thinking forecloses on the manner in which systematised thinking finds its ground in otherwise inexplicable "doings" rather than in tacit but inherently explicable reasons. The common cause of Heidegger, ontological designing, and decoloniality is thus an interest in the situational and processual rather than metaphysical knowing. What calls for clarification, however, is the path by which Heidegger felt and conceptualised this insight as a need to defend the "European _Völker_" and "_German_ spritual life" against a racialised array of internal and external enemies (Maldonado-Torres 2004, pp.33-4).

## Descartes' "Thinking thing"

Heidegger's motivation for his critique of Platonic theory and Aristotelian substance ontology was not based in the notion that theory or formal systematisation could never deliver useful knowledge. Rather, it was grounded in the recognition that theory and substance ontology gave rise to the hegemonic notion that the meaning of being -- including one's own -- is reducible to this particular mode of inteligibility. Whereas Plato and Aristotle told a story of rational foundations and their proof, discernment, and implications, Heidegger took an interest in exposing the ambiguities and contigencies that lay at the center of any attempt to fix the being of beings. The stakes of such an project lay not only in revealing the non-rational, contingent, or historical condition of rational constructions but also in providing a corrective to the rationalist account of human being. An significant point of reference for the modern/colonial appropriation of this tradition is the philosophy of René Descartes (1596-1650) who, at least for Heidegger, represented a key source of contemporary philosophy's inability to think beyond the erroneous separation of thinking substances (consciousness) from extended substances (objects).

The relevant aspect of Descartes' philosophy are directed by a desire on his part to address the falibility of knowledge or the problem of establishing secure principles upon which to generate reliable opinions. Descartes' method for accomplishing this goal is to adopt an attitude of radical doubt concerning everything that we ordinarily take for granted, including the relationship between how we think, our bodies, other people, animals, and the physical objects we encounter in the world. The first step of his _Meditations on the First Philosophy_ (1641) is to outline the strategy of his radical doubt, something that involves a process of undermining the value of common sense and sensate or bodily experience. This is accomplished through rejecting, at least initially, the intuitve distinction between dreaming and being awake, as well as via the elaborate notion that experience ought to be considered an elaborate construction of some malevolent demon intent on deception. [8] Like good security systems salesperson, Descartes' methodological doubt aims at establishing a mood of paranoid uncertainty concerning anything that cannot be logically deduced. This is the condition upon which Descartes points to the self-evidence of thought itself is as the foundational certainty upon which reliable knowledge can be produced. In Descartes' terms, whatever else may be the case, it is thought itself that provides both the grounds for certainty as to the reality of our own existence and a new iteration on the theory of human being. In Descartes terms we are "things that think", that is, "a thing that doubts, percieves, affirms, denies, wills, does not will, that imagines also, and which feels." The task of securing knowledge against all deception thus takes as its object the study what is evident in consciousness itself as opposed to what might be supposed to exist "outside" it. Habitual, intuitive, or "common sense" understandings are hereby undermined for having been accepted as true before any rigorous assessment has been made of how they appear or by what conditions we should afford them the status of having truth, being, or reality. Following these strict terms, Descartes later reduces this list of properties to what is what he considers to be the essence of mind, namely, the ability to concieve of something. Even imagination becomes extraneous to thinking once it is it is reduced to pure intellection.

The most Descartes feels confident to say concerning the reality of bodies is that their existence is probable or something to be affirmed in a statistical or normative sense. From the position of pure intellect he understands no relationship between the sensations of the stomach and the desire to eat, nor between the feeling of something that causes pain and the "sadness" that such a feeling gives rise to. Whatever judgements he may have formed regarding the objects of senses prior to the investigation become the suspect product of habit, something formed in him before he had been able to "weigh and consider the reasons which might oblige me to make them." Eventually he settles on the idea that while the senses are on the face of it untrustworthy, they ought not to be doubted in general. The decisive conclusion, however, re-enforces a strict conceptual division between the substance of mind -- which is identical to the being (intelligibility) of the self -- and the substance of extension:

>from the mere fact that I know with certainty that I exist, and that I do not observe that any other thing belongs necessarily to my nature or essence except that I am a thinking thing, I rightly conclude that my essence consists in this alone, that I am a thinking thing, or a substance whose whole essence or nature consists in thinking. And although perhaps (or rather as I shall shortly say certainly,) I have a body to which I am very closely unitied, nevertheless, because, on the one hand, I have a clear and distinct idea of myself in so far as I am only a thinking and unextended thing, and becuase, on the other hand I have a distinct idea of the body in so far as it is only an extended thing but which does not think, it is certain that I, that is to say my mind, by which I am what I am, is entirely and truly distinct from my body, and may exist without it.

Logically speaking, having reduced its being to pure intellection, the existence of the mind is regarded as being certain and sufficient unto itself. The essential nature of all other beings is otherwise reduced to the idea of extension and all sensory experience rendered as a question of probability rather than necessity.

# The ontological designing of Descartes and the ego conquiro

Descartes' philosophy provides a particularly clear example of the circular or hermeneutical relation between the ontological designing of thought and the designing that is enabled by habits of mind. Born in 1596 and orphaned shortly thereafter, Descartes' entered a school of the Jesuit order at 10 years old where he remained until 1615. The Jesuit's had been founded in 1539 (approved by the Pope in 1540) under the leadership of Ignatius of Loyola. Ingatius had converted to spirtual life after a battle wound ended his early military career. In the course of his conversation Ingatius developed a practice of ascetic style meditation that was later codified as the _Spiritual Exercises_. The _Excercises_ aimed at developing a discernment for distinguishing good spirits from evil spirits, with the ultimate purpose being "the conquest of the self and regulation of one's life in such a way that no decision is made under the influence of any inordinate attachment." [10] This will to total self-mastery was coupled with an unreserved commitment to the authority of the Catholic Church, the strength of which is represented in the constitution, adopted in 1594, that required the good Jesuit to follow directions of his superiors "as if he were a lifeless body". [11] This ideology enabled the Jesuits to become a crucial force within the both the Counter-Reformation and colonial exploits of the Catholic controlled empires. The timing of Descartes entry into formal education came just a few years after the Jesuits had returned on invitation from the monarch after a brief expulsion to establish schools for the education of clerics, young nobles, and wealthy members of the bourgeoisie. The influence of Jesuits Descartes' philosophical interests and method is evident in Enrique Dussel's description of their pedogogical theories and practices:

>Each Jesuit constituted a singular, independent, and modern _subjectivity_, performing daily an individual "examination of conscience," without communal choral hyms or prayers as was the case with medieval Benedictine monks. Put differently, the young Descartes needed to withdraw into silence three times a day, _to reflect_ on his own subjectivity and "examine" wth extreme _self-consciousness_ and _clarity_ the intention and content of every action ...

As is the case with Aristotle, the philosophy that this form of discpline gave rise to represents a significant point of opposition for both Heideggerian and decolonial critiques. The Heideggerian critique centers on the pressumption that one's involvement in the world can be meaningfully denied, that human being is reducible to "thinking substance", and the notion that the most value form of knowledge is that which can be represented as a formal system. Feminist-/Marxist-/Decolonial scholars on the other hand show how the understandings of the self, the body, and the nature of knowledge represented in Descartes' philosophy acted as a material force in the emergence and management of the colonial matrix of power. Silvia Frederici for instance explains how the mechanistic conception of the body propogated by Descartes and his contemporary Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679) played an important role the emergence of the labor theory of value, a theory that relates as much to the labor of reproduction (the uterus as machine) as any other form of work (2004 pp. 133-55). By Frederici's argument it is the human body rather than the steam engine or clock that represents the first machine developed by capitalism, and understanding, worked out on the bodies of women, Amerindians, and African slaves, that prefigures Taylor's twentieth-century theory of labor management. On a related point, Dussel finds that Descartes' mechanistic conception of the body desregards questions of racism, gender, and other forms of difference, as such aiding the development of the "zero-point" or "view from nowhere" as the prevailing habit of mind of Europeans, a process that Santiago Castro-Gómez first observes in the emergence of perspective painting during the European Renaissance. Descartes hostility to indeterminacy and chance is also deeply significant to the emergence of modern/colonial attitudes towards economics, politics, and knowledge. As F. E. Sutcliffe writes, "What characterizes the men of the generation of Descartes is above all the will to dominate, to control events, to eliminate chance and the irrational" (1968, p. 21). Considering the proximity to and complex interrelations of the Spanish Inquisition, early modern witch-trails, the colonisation of the Americas, and the emergence of Baconite theories of scientific method, Sutcliffe's description resonates with the way Nelson Maldonado-Torres interprets Descartes' thought as the expression of a systemic attitude of suspicion that was prefigured by, and encodes, the notion of an _ego conquiro_, a self that secures its being through domination of its own being and the being of others (Maldonado-Torres 2007). This interpretation is further supported by Sutcliffe who, while commenting on the frequency of military analogies throughout Descartes writing suggests that "one rightly guesses that we are here in the presence not of a professional philosopher but of a soldier who, with remarkable audacity and a great nobility of spirit, sets out upon the path of intellectual conquest" (p. 14).

## Reversing Descartes

So far I have covered two of the major points of critique for Heidegger's philosophy, namely, the substance ontology as elaborated by Aristotle and the mind/body problem as set up by Descartes' that carries on the metaphysical tradition but with a dualist ontology. Throughout this process I have tried to situate these points of critique in relation to a history of philosophy, a history of ontological designing, and a history of coloniality. Some of the detail of what has been covered here goes beyond the immediate interest of demonstrating the value of Heideggerian thinking for design theory, however in the process of providing this explanation I am at the same time anticipating and giving a first pass over things that will be relevant in later sections.

In concert with other historical movements, Descartes helped to prefigure both the emphasis given to epistemology within European philosophy as well as a wider "common sense" concerning the proper way to understand human being and its relation to the world. As Dreyfus argues, the tendency observed in Descartes be situated in a tradition that travels from Pato to Descartes, then from Descartes on to Immanuel Kant and Edmund Husserl, one of Heidegger's early mentors. This tradition, which Winograd and Flores label 'rationalistic', is characterised by an interest generating formal descriptions or models of its object of study, whether that be the working of the mind, language, politics, markets, society, nature, or any other domain of research. This approach is valued for the way it lends itself towards seemingly neutral forms of calculative or predictive reasoning, the premise being that control and certainty, or at the very least a level of predictability, can be established by descifering the underlying laws of any domain of inquiry. Dreyfus locates Husserl within this tradition for the way in which he, under the influence of Descartes, practices a methodological "bracketing" off of the world and provides an account of intelligibility that is premised on the idea that human minds are directed towards objects by way of representational content. By this account, the subject remains self-contained and anything encountered obtains its meaning as the image we form as we direct our attention to it. In this respect Husserl's image of human intelligibility maintains a commitment to the notion that our most basic way of making sense of things in the world is produce mental representations.

Heidegger broke with this way of thinking by priviledging questions of ontology over epistemology and the significance of non-representational understanding over representational knowledge. Heidegger's interest always remained with the question of being but in the context of _Being and Time_ he set himself the task of providing an account of human being that dispensed with mind/body problem as a meaningful frame of reference. Unlike philosophers such as Descartes or Husserl whose studies were set up as investigations into a philosophically reflective subject cut off from or secured against the world, Heidegger directed his attention at the condition we find ourselves in before and as a condition of obtaining the mood of detatched representational thought. In doing so Hiedegger undercut the image of intelligibility that continues to be priviledged by the rationalistic tradition. Dreyfus reads this as in effect reversing Descartes interest insofar as Heidegger looks to recover the question of the being from which reflective thinking arises; the dictum "I think therefore I am" becomes "I am therefore I think". (Interestingly, Dreyfus' formulation precedes the exact same reversal of terms put forward by Walter Mignolo, albeit in the context of a different (though not entirely different) set of concerns.)

## Dasein and stance-taking

For all the criticism leveled at Descartes it is curious to observe that the course of inquiry in _Being and Time_ is somewhat similarly structured as an investigation of the being who poses the question of inquiry. As Heidegger writes, "To work out the question of being adequately, we must make a being---the inquirer--- perspicuous in his own being" (p. 27). Unlike Descartes, however, the being of the inquirer in _Being and Time_ is characterised from the outset as being-in-the-world as opposed to a "thinking substance". For Heidegger, the distinctiveness of the being of the inquirer obtains not in it being the foundational source of certainty but, rather, in that it is the being for whom its own being is an issue. This being is in a basic sense human being or, rather, the human way of being. Heidegger offers us the concept of _Dasein_ as way to hone in on what is particular to and interesting about a capacity that is not in principle limited to any particlar "species being".

In a literal sense the word "Dasein" can be translated as "being-there". This is useful for drawing out the sense in which the concept in Heidegger's usage speaks to the being of situatedness, that is, of finding oneself always already partaking of an experience that is concrete, corporal, meaningful, and finitudinal. In this sense Dasein is not the abstract subject of Descartes investigations, the being whose being is defined in terms of what remains once everything pertaining to the world has been distinguished and set aside, nor is it the Husserlian consciousness made up of representational content. Anne-Marie Willis draws on an interpretation by Albert Hofstadter to define Desein as its understanding which is a way of indicating that Dasein is not something like an attribute or property but, rather, a condition of intelligibility. Importantly, because it is located in practices that are embodied, social, active, dynamic, interlinked, layered, and distributed, this understanding is at base non-cognitive and non-representational. By this account cognition is a derivative dimension of experience that covers over much of what is important and significant to how we relate the world and each other.

Dasein, as Heidegger puts it, is the being that, in its being, comports itself towards its being. Dreyfus interprets this as meaning that Dasein's way of being is to take stand on its own being or to adopt an interpretation that provides a sense of meaning and structure to a persons life. This interpretation need not be consciously adopted as it speaks to pre-conscious way in which we adopt a role or purpose from what is made available to us within a socially defined field of possibility. I child, for instance, might take up the role of being the "class clown" first and foremost as a behavioural disposition before becoming aware that this is a known social archetype. Likewise, adults play out a certain interprations of their existence as they take up various roles within the domains of family, friendship groups, or work. A "stance on one's being" can be thought of as the understanding that a person takes up within the range of possibilities that are available to them within the culture that they grew up in.

The phenomena of "stance-taking" in Heidegger's thinking represents a distinctly different conception of of human being as compared with the model of the Cartesian subject. Whereas the cogito gains clarity, definition, and control by means of withdrawing from the world, the concept of Dasein is unthinkable other than as a relation to a world of activity of which it partakes in a concernful manner. In this respect the startling significance of Dasein is that it has no metaphysically determinable essence or rational ground upon which to rationalise its existence. As Dasein, there is no transcendental place from which to determine what Dasein is supposed to be or do, meaning that the only way of answering such questions is through more or less creative appropriation of meanings that have been historically and materially determined. If Descartes' cogito consolidates a "zero-point" mentality, the concept of Dasein retrieves and brings into focus the manner in which the meaning of our existence is not rationally or universally determinable but is, rather, a matter of what we ourselves make of the possibilities for being that we discern within the cultural practices of our upbringing. Moreover, and importantly, the very condition of being able to discern this or that possibility for being and to determine the manner of its appropriation is itself a question of already having a pre-ontological (non-theorised) cultural ontology. Culture and Dasein are irreducibly intertwined with each other, existing through and as a condition of possibility for the other. The relation between culture and Dasein, however, does not eliminate the place of contingency, risk, and vulnerability that is always at stake in "stance-taking".

A culture embodies both discernable possibilities for being and sense for discerning them, but it cannot provide a definitive answer to what stance is best to take. Drawing on the existentialist writings of Søren Kierkegaard, Heidegger brings to the fore the way in which such questioning produces a sense of one's own groundlessness that manifests as anxiety. A Dasein may be more or less open to the experience and significance of the groundlessness of its being and, as Heidegger observes and makes an issue of, the general tendency is to "flee" the such anxiety for a stance that has the feeling of being most natural, ordinary, and safe. Whether Dasein flees from or confronts the question of its own being, the practice of stance-taking remains a matter of concern in a number of ways: as a way of answering the question of "for what am I doing this?", as a basis for answering the question "what should I do?", and as something that can be tested or put on the line. The concept of Dasein thus stands as an interpretation of the basic structure and predicament of its being rather than as a solution to it. By this account, the means for Dasein to deal with an existence that concerns it is to practice an always ongoing interpretation of its own being. This interpretation is ontological insofar as it shapes a way of being but not necessarily a work of philosophical ontology in the sense of what Heidegger is trying to do in _Being and Time_. The salient point here is that unlike the Cartesian subject, Dasein is inherently and unavoidably hermeneutical, affective, and involved rather than certain, rational and detatched.

## Equipmentality and ontological designing

On the face of it "stance-taking" may seem like an abstract concept but in the context of Heidegger's analysis the idea is intended to invoke a concrete aspect of the phenomena of existence. Stance-taking represents the pre-ontological manner in which Dasein becomes intelligible to itself in the context of its everday practices. The work of stance-taking is at the same time directive of everyday practices in so far as provides, among other things, a sense of identity and purpose to individuals, groups, and communities. In Heideggers view the being of Dasein has to be interpreted holistically and relationally, meaning that even though stance-taking may not always be foremost in the mind of a Dasein caught up in everyday coping, insofar as it is dimension of Dasein's being it is always marginally present and able to be drawn upon as a guide to whatever might be required of a situation. Likewise, stance-taking only has meaning as a dimension of a concrete existence made up of a network of practices. As a way to understand what practices are and the extent to which they operate as public, sub-discursive or non-representational ensembles of equipmental-/bodily technique, Dreyfus points to descriptions by French anthropologist Pierre Bourdieu who -- despite his own strong criticisms of Heidegger's political ontology -- exemplifies for Dreyfus what Heidegger is aiming to describe through his analysis of Dasein:

> A whole group and a whole symbolically structured environment exerts an anonymous, pervasive pedagogic action. ... The essential part of the modus operandi which defines practical mastery is transmitted in practice, in its practical state, without attaining the level of discourse. The child imitates not "models" but other people's actions. Body _hexis_ speaks directly to motor function, in the form of a pattern of postures that is both individual and systemic, because linked to a whole system of techniques involving the body and tools, and charged with a host of social meanings and values: in all societies, children are particularly attentive to the gestures and postures which, in their eyes, express everything that goes to make an accomplished adult -- a way of walking, a tilt of the head, facial expressions, ways of sitting and of using implements, always associated with a tone of voice, a style of speech, and (how could it be otherwise?) a certain subjective experience.

From a Heideggerian perspective on practice every one of the elements that Bourdieu identifies as being involved in the composition of a practice -- the body, tools, symbols, speech, tone, and style -- are all relevant and interrelated. The significance of equipment in particular works as a useful point of entry for theorists of ontological designing, however the strength of the approach lies in way theorists have been able to bring to the fore the agency of equipment as relational, that is, as connected to and so affected by affecting the body, speech, and less tangible qualities such as mood, judgement, and style.

Anne-Marie Willis provides an exemplary account of the significance of the Heideggerian ontology of equipment in her essay on ontological designing. In the relevant section she opens with an description of how the rationalist or metaphysical tradition would approach the question of equipment through the lense of functions and properties. This approach represents the intelligibility of the substance ontology in which the meaning given to an designed thing would involve an abstract normative description of the work it is supposed to perform, the materials used in its construction, the overal performance specifications, the model type and so on. While this scientific mode of intelligibility is indeed relevant to certain aspects design of practice the image it provide of any design is removed from the actual experience and ontological effects of using designed things. In this view the tool is viewed as being as self-contained as an object as the Cartesian subject is as a mind. The problem for Heidegger and the lesson for designers is that the being of objects cannot be conflated with the being of equipment or equipmentality. While Dasein is required to deal with both modes of intelligibility within modern/colonial societies the being of objects has for the most part overshadowed an awareness and appreciation for the significance of everday equipmentality.

For Heidegger (and designers), equipmentality is part of the what makes up the condition of the existence or understanding that is Dasein. As Heidegger puts it "we understand ourselves and our existence by way of the activities we pursue and the things we take care of" (159). The being of equipmentality is not that of substance ontology or representational thought as it does not pressupose an act of conscious classification and rule following as a condition of usability. The experience of sitting down at a table, for instance, does not proceed by way of the kind information processing model depicted in cyborg films such as _Terminator_ or _RoboCop_. Rather than being encountered as an object with properties, a piece of equipment is encountered as "something-in-order-to" whose meaning belongs to a broader "equipmental whole". Every item of equipment obtains its meaning as part of an "equipmental nexus". It makes sense for set of chairs, for instance, to surrounds the table in the communal living area of the house in support of the practice of housemates sitting down together to share a meal. Equipment is thus essentially  relational in a way that objects can only be in the abstract. As Heidgger puts it, the idea of _an_ equipment is not simply grammatically incorrect but practically unintelligible. This is due to the fact that the being of equipment, as a non-representational dimension of a material practice, is not something that is available for contextless cataloguing. Dreyfus uses the example of a chair to point out that we know what one is and how to use it without having to draw up a formal definition. The prospects of a water-tight definition is undermined by borderline cases such as a bean-bag or bicycle seat. However, because the in-order-to of chairs obtains in practical familiarity, these definitional issues have no bearing on the ability of someone who grew up using them to cope with recognisable instances in a ways that satify their own sense of comfort and custom.

One of the characteristics of equipmentality, one that provides an important insight into the interests of design as distinct from a fine-art oriented aesthetics is the tendency of equipment to express its familiarity by withdrawing from attention. When, for example, an ensemble of knife, cutting board, bench, lighting, floor, and experienced cook comes together in a way that is fit for dicing vegetables the entire ensemble and its particulars tends to "hold itself in" in such a way that attention can be directed to other things other than the equipment itself. In this case, the cook's sense of themselves as a distinct part of the ensemble also withdraws into the flow of cutting, not as fully determined machine but in the form of non-deliberate, un-thematic practical awareness that Heidegger calls "circumspection". It is this form of awareness that constitutes how we are at most moments in time as opposed to the subject of Descartes' disciplined meditations, a scientific mode of being that Descartes himself acknowledges can only ever be sustained for short periods of time.

The phenomena of withdrawal and practical circumspection is interpretative or hermeneutical in a way that is of particular interest to design theorists as it describes the how designed things partake in humanning as process of naturalising the artificial. Most of what design is and does goes unnoticed and misrecognised because the majority of designing, from that of individual items, to systems, to experiences and more, is deliberately designed to fit in with the in-order-to-ness of equipmentality, meaning that most designs aim at withdrawing from attention and taking up a material role in the conditioning of intelligibility itself. Designs are designed to be absorbed into an equipmental whole of in-order-tos, to become embedded in the relational meshwork of body, tools, symbols, speech, tone, style etc. that together constitutes a meaningful practice. Thomas Wendt provides a useful description how this effect shows up in case of someone who accidentally leaves their phone at home. As he puts it, the sense of loss this creates is not related to the fetishisation of the device but

>because the phone provides an almost infinite means of intereactions that allow the user to attain goals, Without that cluster of affordances we call a modile device, we are forced to design our situations by other means that seem substandard by comparison. (p. 21)

Another of Wendt's descriptions, this time of what is invovled in the design of an air travel experience, shows how design shapes our experience through the ontology of involved concern rather than an ontology of abstract objectification.

>For example, when we design an experience for air travel it is easy to become caught up in considering physical lovations: cab to the airport, ariport terminal, lounge, bar, security, on the plane, etc. The difficult part, however, is to understand the user's _involvment_ with each of those locations in relation to their concern. When in a security line, the concern is certainly with physical surroundings, but also the tasks to be done (remove liquids, take off shoes, etc.), authority process, time until takeoff, etc. The post-security mindset is often quite differnt in that although the user is in a very similar physical locatio, there are now different concerns: getting to the gate, finding food before boarding, makiing a call, findin ga power outlet, etc.

Equipmentality can in this sense be taken as a primoridial condition of Dasein's intelligibility insofar as its agency manifest as what is brought into and out ofpresence rather than as being focus of attention itself. Designing is ontological because it participates in Dasein's pre-ontological sense of being-in-the-world. But this process or effect is not neutral for at the same time that designs are designed to fit in to the existing equipmental whole of any user, they are also participate in giving direction and meaning to experience. As Winograd and Flores noted, the condition of designs being able to reveal possibilities and support activities is that they also institute limits, modulate sensitivities, and cover over details and possibilities within a practice. Their example is the "electronic library" that is automated to retrieve reading options based on cataloging techniques. While such a system offers a range of desired affordances it also changes the experience and practice of visiting a library. Visiting the shelves yourself, for instance, provides the opportunity to encounter a book in the context of other texts that you may not have thought to  searched for but that nevertheless strike you as interesting or relevant to your topic of research. The in-order-to of the retrieval system eliminates a previous dimension of the library experience that may have seemed marginal or incidental but that is nevertheless not without significance within the overall practice. In this way the retreival system modulates the character of the practice, perhaps even contributing to a structural drift in cultural significance of libraries. Similarly, the diffusion of machine systems within such practices as carpentry and writing has a profound impact on the character and distribution of skills within a society.

The point in these cases is that the dialectic of what is made both available and unavailable is a feature of the equipmental whole of any domain of activity. The terms of this dialectic is not zero-sum -- a good design process for instance is able to draw out the complexities and nuances of how different designs are likely to modulate an experience and thus test for what might be lost or gained in its use -- but it does speak to the way in which designs always embody an interpretation of what is more or less important or valuable within any domain. Similarly to the condition of stance-taking, the hermeneutical nature ontological designing means that there is no place outside of influence of design from which to make such judgements. This means that every design appropriates and embodies the influence of an historical equipmental whole at the same time that it intervenes in shifting the character of any practice. This effect is what Tony Fry describes as design's capacity to embody decision and direction in things. This is a feature that stands out in the event encountering a new thing or a change that requires some getting used to, but in most cases at least this very quickly becomes absorbed into the ordinary naturalisation of the artificial.

## The sociality of Dasein

So far we have outlined some of the reasons for why Heidegger's hermeneutical-ontology of Dasein has proven a source of insight for design theorists, particularly as in contrast with efforts to theorise design from within the rationalist tradition. The account given only skims the surface of what design theorists have been able to draw from Heidegger but it nevertheless establishes a sense for Heidegger's philosophy has proven valuable. The sections to follow will shift from a focus on equipmentality to focus on the social dimensions of Heidegger's ontology as part of the next step towards engaging critical interpretations of Heidegger's political ontology.

In _Being and Time_, one of Heidegger's closest engagements with questions of sociality begins in section 26, "The Dasein-with of Others and Everyday Being-with". Here Heidegger observes how others are encountered in the act of designerly type work. Others are for whom a work is created, meaning that even though they may not physically present with us as we work they are in a sense present for us as a matter of concern. The clothesmaker in the flow of their work retains an awareness that they are making for wearers just as a writer is maintains an awareness of the reader as a guiding dimension of their practice. Likewise, there is the producer of materials in use, the owner of the field we walk by, and the person from whom we bought the book we are reading. Others are therefore encountered as part of the every equipmental nexus of in-order-to that we pass through. Things thus show up as in-order-tos for other Daseins who are themeselves intelligible in a way that differs from equipment. In beginning to think about the being of other Daseins Heidegger confonts the limited way in which the Cartesian subject has prefigured this as a question of "inter-subjectivity". In Heidegger's formulation, however, others are not everyone but "me" but, rather, those from whom I, for the most part and in a circumspective sense, do not distinguish myself. "The world of Dasein is a with-world," one in which Dasein's interpretation of its own being arises in view and concern with what (the) One does rather than first and foremost with what I do.

These observations are of course related to and have bearing on equipment. As Dreyfus helps to clarify, equipment is public in the sense that it is designed in view of, and therefore by and for a with-world others. I design not just for myself but for other people, people whose being has some presence in my work as a designer. Additionally, equipment partakes in normativity in both the way it conditions an averaging of equipmental interactions -- we tread similar footpaths, use similar mobile phones, drive similar cars -- as well as being a locus of proper use or common style. As Dreyfus puts it, we understand a chair by knowing that it is normally used for sitting. The design and use of the chair thus embodies -- in both the user and the chair -- what One does with chairs. The normativity expressed in the relation between users and equipment is so powerful that someone who is familiar with chairs will struggle to see them as something other equipment for sitting. Behind the obviousness of chairs, however, there is likely to be a story of having been taught as a child how to use a chair properly. As Heidegger puts it, "The obviousness, the matter-of-course way in which this movement of Dasein comes to pass also belongs to the manner of being of the One."

The being-with of Dasein is thus expressed in appearance and maintenence of norms as something that we are circumspectually concerned with. This is the case even when we are confonted with the experience of deviation for deviation can only be experienced as such on the basis of that from which it deviates. As Dreyfus emphasises, such averageness plays role in being able to generate and sustain referential whole of equipmentality: "norms define the in-order-tos that define the being of equipment, and also the for-the-sake-of-whichs that give equipment its significance" (p. 154).

Norms, however, also set up a problem for Dasein that is expressed in the experience of deviance. In teasing out this phenomenon Dreyfus sharpens what he argues is a vaguely articulated distinction in _Being and Time_ between a positive conformity and a negative conformism. In Dreyfus' terms conformity has positive importance for Dasein for the sense in which it allows for public intelligibility. As an essentially social form of understanding, Dasein cannot be without some sense of conformity for it is on this basis that life of meaningful involvement in a world of people and things is possible. Dasein-ish intelligibility thus arises on the basis of what it shares. Importantly, the sharing that allows for intelligibility is not conceptual or available for formal representation but, rather, an "average comportment" or style that expresses a pre-ontological interpretation of being.

However, even as Heidegger draws out the significance of conformity to the intelligibility of Dasein he also reacts against its leveling effects. While conformity as socialisation or the induction into norms is necessary condition of intelligibility as such, Hiedegger also wants to draw out the manner in which the averageness of norms can often lead to an attitude of resignation to a taken for granted way of being. Stance-taking in this sense occurs but only in the most shallow sense, that is, one that is unconcerned with the depth and variety of possibilities for being, and untroubled by the fundamental groundlessness of intelligibility itself. Confromity thus degenerates into conformism, a relatively thoughtless take-up the tradition that one grows up in. In this respect Heidegger's own project in _Being and Time_ can be understood as an effort to shake his readers out of a sense of easy acceptance and resignation. As he put it in a passage from the second division:

>Dasein's _kind of being_ thus demands that any ontological Interpretation which sets itself the goal of exhibiting the phenomena in their primordiality, should capture the being of this entity, in spite of this entity's own tendency to cover things up. Existential analysis, therefore, constantly has the character of _doing violence_ whether to the claims of the everyday interpretaion, or to its complacency and its tranquilized obviousness. (359)

## Alternative readings

Examining the sociality of Dasein and the issue





## Fry

In his introduction to _R/U/A TV?_ acknowledges what he calls the "aberration" of Heidegger's Nazi attachements.

Heidegger has blood on his hands. Heiegger was a "flawed opponent" of the ideas and embodiment of modernity's "productivist metaphysic"

Fry extends Otto Pöggler's question concerning how one might come to terms with the fact that Heidegger was a fascist with the question of how to come to terms with the fact that to be Western is, in part, "to be the imposer of a 'will to power' and a destroyer of Others".

It is hard to understand what value lies in "coming to terms" with "being Western". While we cannot become other than what historical circumstances have determined is possible, this does not imply that only option available in this case is to come to terms with this identity, particularly what is within our power to change.

Fry reherses a version of the Levinasian critique:

>Nazism is always immanent in his thought, via notions of essential being that posit a superiority of the condition of Being over the knowing of metaphysics. Object/being is placed over mind/reason, which is to place being beyond the frame of the judgment of good and evil. (pp. 17-18)

Fry concludes: "he must be refused as the source of a theology or doxa. He is also replete with ideas to excavate, transform, recoil from and learn by."



## Nelson Maldonado-Torres

---
[1] Heidegger himself rejected the label of "philosopher" in favour of "thinking." The meaning of such a distinction, however, requires an explanation that seem irrelevant to what I am trying to achieve here. Given that there really is no way to understand Heidegger's work other than as and via an engagement with what continues to be called philosophy for my purposes here I see no major issue with referring to Heidegger and his work as philosophical, particularly given that it provides for a sense of difference with respect to the interests and disposition of design theorists, granted of course that in reality such a difference is not categorically distinct.

[2] For classic accounts of the connection between European colonial exploits and the German National Socialist movement see Hannah Arendt's _The Origins of Totalitarianism_ and Aimé Césaire's _Discourse on Colonialism_. See also Nelson Maldonado-Torres' _Against War_.

[3] See also Maurice Merleau-Ponty's critique of the notion of 'sensation'  in introductory section of _Phenomenology of Perception_.

[4] In anticipation of thinking the relation between design and coloniality we can note a number of interrelated avenues for consideration:
1. That design has been essential to normalising and extending the colonial drive towards conquest and expansion.
2. That design has been essential to consolidating and maintaining sense of entitlement that sustains cultures of conquest.
3. That design has has been essential to sustaining a capitalist mode of production that is structurally reliant upon processes of expansion and exclusion.
4. That design plays a role in the construction of border ontologies or ways of experiencing the impact of coloniality as a struggle for coherence, peace, self-respect, and meaning in one's everyday life.
5. That design holds potential for normalising alternative a practices of repair and respect.

[5] The common practice is write "being" in the capitalised form "Being", as is done so throughout the Macquarie and Robinson translation of _Being and Time_. I have chosen to use the lower-case form so as to counter the tendency to interpret the word in mystical or metaphysical ways.

[6] The idea of "Western" philosophy, particularly as it implies a line connection from the Modern to the Classical via Medieval Christian thinkers, has been contested on the grounds of its ahistorical and partial reading of history (Dussel). As a case in point even the narrow conception of philosophy, that which takes the record of ancient Greek thought as its point of origin, generally fails to acknowledge and include the material contributions of thinkers of the Islamic world. The origins of concepts in Chinese, Indian and other non-European sources, including the work of African thinkers prior to what is recorded of the Ionian pre-Socratics, has also been marginalised and erased from within the dominant historical narrative. Additionally there is the problem of taking the idea of "the West" as a natural concept despite one if its key premises being the ability of imperial powers classify and regulate subalterned modes of thought and the story of their origins. While more could be said on this issue the point to acknowledged here is that there is no way of escaping the ideological import of the idea of "Western" philosophy. I use the term is here with caution as way to explain how Heidegger positioned himself in the history of thought. While I would argue that this is an important part of the story of Heidegger's thought I have no interest in diminishing the problem of the geopolitics of Heiegger's thought (Maldonado-Torres).

[7] This account draws upon a variety of sources including Aristotle's _Categories_ and _Metaphysics_, Hugh Lawson-Tancred's "Introduction" to his translation of the _Metaphysics_ (1998), Hubert Dreyfus' _Being in the World: A Commentary on Heidegger's Being and Time Division I_ (1991), Howard Robinson's entry on "Substance" (2004) in the _Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy_ https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/substance/, John F. Sowa's "Building, Sharing, and Merging Ontologies" (2009) http://www.jfsowa.com/ontology/ontoshar.htm, and Gregory B. Sadler's "Aristotle on Primary and Secondary Substance" (2017) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mupWQPDZBLc.

[8] Tim Ingold provides an insightful critique of this doctrine with regards to making in "Toward an Ecology of Materials" (2012), _Annual Review of Anthropology_, 41 (1), pp. 427-442. The doctrine of hylomorphism is also connected with Aristotle's economic and political philosophy insofar as, for instance, he viewed men as the active or "form giving" component vis-a-vis women as the passive "matter" component that together created the composite substance of "Man".

[9] Descartes' includes an his first meditation with a comment on the difficulty of persuing method of radical doubt that draws a comparison with the experience of a slave. In his words, the task of his investigation is "arduous", no doubt as it requires the suppression of a number of intuitionive commitments to the existence of the world, his won body, and the existence of God. Such attachments, as he puts it, induces "a certain indolence" that leads him back into a mood of involved sensate coping. The comparison to the slave is constructed along the lines of equating the dream of freedom with the "indolence" of the non-skeptical attitude. Both are, as Descartes suggests, merely "pleasant illusions". He confesses that in his own case the seduction of sleep has as much to do with an anxiety over "dispersing the shadows" that have been cast by the rigorous confrontation with doubt. The analogy is similar the language used by Blaise Pascal in the _Pensées_ (1670) in which he describes reason as that which traps the thinker into accepting the rational argument for believing in God even if the belief itself has not yet been embodied. In both cases reason acts as an instrument of discipline upon sensual attachments of the body, both for the self and the other.

[10] http://spex.ignatianspirituality.com/SpiritualExercises/Puhl Accessed 21/3/2017
